---
layout: post
author: elliott
title: "(Optional) Getting Started with Regular Expressions"
categories:
- reading
- how-to
external: false
---

# The Wild Wonderful World of Wegexes

We didn't get to regexes in this class, but you might consider using them in your final.

Resources:

* [Pythex](https://pythex.org/) is a nice way to build out regular expressions while testing them visually
* [Regex Crossword](https://regexcrossword.com/) can be a fun way to learn regexes by producing text that will match multiple regexes, like crossword puzzles have overlapping words.


Regexes are super powerful. It takes a lot of practice to be able to parse the complicated ones. But it's also OK to start simple:

* `this` is a regex that matches these exact characters: `this`
* `(t)?his` is a regex that matches `his` and, optionally, `this`. The parentheses plus the `?` indicate that the `t` is optional.
* `[th]is` matches `his` OR `tis`. The square brackets indicate either/or.

[Here's this example on Pythex](https://pythex.org/?regex=%5Bth%7Cbr%5Dis&test_string=his%0Athis%0Athat%0Atis%0Awhich%0Awish%0Abris%0A&ignorecase=0&multiline=0&dotall=0&verbose=0)

## Character Classes

_Note: Regex character classes are different from the Classes used to make objects in Python._

The above examples add in some regex **syntax** but use characters. Regex also provides special symbols which indicate a range of characters. `\d` indicates a **d**igit, for instance.

So, the pattern of a typical US phone number would be written

* `\d\d\d-\d\d\d-\d\d\d\d`

This would match string like `555-867-5309`, since there are digits and hyphens that follow the pattern above.

* `\d` indicates **d**igit characters, 0-9
* `\w` indicates **w**ord characters, a-z, A-Z, 0-9, and _
* `\s` indicates **s**pace characters, like ` `, `\t` (tab), and `\n` (newline)

The capitalized versions of each of these match _everything not in the classes_.

## Selecting

Let's say we only wanted the area code of a phone number. We can use parentheses to select just that portion of a match:

* `(\d\d\d)-\d\d\d-\d\d\d\d`

Why not just use `\d\d\d`? well, that would also find other instances of three digits in a row. We want three digits in a row only when they're followed by the rest of a phone number. So we write the pattern of a phone number and select what we want out of it.
