---
layout: post
author: elliott
title: "Final Project Guide: Code Style"
categories:
- reading
- how-to
external: false
---


Use the below style guide to keep the code for your final project readable and standardized.

Your code style does not need to be **perfect**, but it should be as consistent with this guide as you can make it.

Note: I will not assess style until you turn in the final version of your code, but it's much easier to use this guide throughout, rather than at the end. In particular, **naming** things is much easier to do at the outset.

<p><strong>Capitalization</strong></p>
<ul>
    <li>Use <code>snake_case</code> for variable and function names.</li>
    <li>Use <code>Capital</code> case for Python Classes.</li>
</ul>
<p><strong>Naming</strong></p>
<ul>
    <li>Use descriptive singular nouns for variables containing a single thing. Use descriptive plural nouns for variables</li>
    <li>Append <code>_</code> and a data type to your variable names. The data type should be how Python writes it, so a dictionary would use <code>_dict</code> as its suffix.</li>
    <li>Examples:
        <ul>
            <li>A string that contains a name would be <code>name_str</code>.&nbsp;</li>
            <li>A list of names would be <code>names_list</code></li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li>When a function returns something, prepend it with <code>get_</code> followed by the thing it returns, and the thing's data type.</li>
    <li>Examples
        <ul>
            <li>A function that returns a name string would be <code>get_name_str()</code></li>
            <li>A function that returns a list of name would be <code>get_names_list()</code></li>
        </ul>
    </li>
</ul>
<p><strong>Comments/Documentation</strong></p>
<ul>
    <li>Use comments to explain the function and flow of your code</li>
    <li>Use docstrings (multi-line strings that use <code>"""</code>) to document what your functions do.
        <ul>
            <li>A common format would be to describe what the function takes as parameters, anything it does, and what it returns (as applicable; not all functions do all of these).</li>
            <li>Examples:
                <ul>
                    <li>Takes a list of names and prints those that start with E.</li>
                    <li>Takes a list of names and returns a list of names sorted by last name.</li>
                    <li>Takes a setting and returns its value from <code>options_dict</code>.</li>
                </ul>
            </li>
        </ul>
    </li>
</ul>
<p><strong>Overall organization</strong></p>
<p>Each Python file you write should follow roughly this structure (not all programs will have all parts, but when they do they should be in roughly this order):</p>
<ul>
    <li><code>import</code> statements</li>
    <li>Global variable definitions (as opposed to function variables, which will be inside their respective functions)</li>
    <li>Class definitions</li>
    <li>Function definitions</li>
    <li>Main loop and/or function calls</li>
</ul>
<p><strong>Overall cleanliness</strong></p>
<p>Your lines of code should be well spaced and clean. Follow the example of the code you're writing in. Some examples:</p>
<ul>
    <li>Leave spaces on either side of operators. <code>x = 0</code>, not <code>x=0</code></li>
    <li>Use blank lines to separate blocks of code that aren't related.&nbsp; For instance, the assignment here is separated from the conditional:</li>
</ul>
<pre>x = 0<br /><br />if x &gt; 0:<br />  print("x is positive")<br />else:<br />  print("x is negative")</pre>