---
layout: post
author: rabouti
title: "Rabouti's Cultural Immersion Meetup Writeup"
---


On November 15, I attended The Austin Python Meetup’s virtual event “An Evening of Python Coding” – hosted by Jacob Barhak and featured guest speaker, Gabriel Manor-Liechtman (who gave a demo of “PyLint”).  Through this event, I learned how accessible these kinds of public groups are that are willing to help individuals learn about code and answer all of their code-related questions. This event inspired me to take action to learn more from community groups rather than limiting my learning potential to the classroom. Additionally, I was introduced to the Python module “PyLint” - which is an analysis tool that can help enrich the quality of coding style (from my understanding). Before the meetup, I did not know that PyLint existed. Although I still do not fully grasp what it is, its full functionality, and features, I am still grateful that I had the exposure for potential future reference. 

“An Evening of Python Coding” was less intimidating and more welcoming than I anticipated it would be. The host, Jacob, cultivated an environment that was very open to sharing information and asking questions. The guest speaker, Gabriel, was very knowledgeable, but was slightly hard for me to follow. I think that was largely due to my current level of fluency and my just being exposed to “PyLint.” 

In the future, I can see myself becoming a member of a professional community like The Austin Python Meetup.” I enjoy building bridges of mutual understanding with individuals with a diverse range of perspectives and experience levels. Collaborating and connecting with individuals varying in perspective and experience will allow me to close lapses in my knowledge and enhance my abilities to innovate. Sometimes you can instantly unlock a new way of understanding something or thinking about something by conversing with someone and listening to their unique insights - for a matter that may have been “fuzzy” before might instantly click. Moreover, I want to access this group or one that is similar to learn more about my personal coding interests and maximize my knowledge in the programming realm. If I see an in person or virtual meetup that is covering “Maya” or “Unity” then I am ALL in! It is now my personal mission to research communities that will support my professional growth that pertain to my creative and coding interests. By frequently exposing myself to code and practicing writing code in a community setting that promotes growth and communicating ideas, I think I will only be better for it.  

## Final Thoughts 

Conclusively, I feel so inspired after attending the Python meetup. I am certain that joining a community of like-minded individuals would serve as a valuable asset to my future career plans as an artist and technologist. It is evident that there is more depth to coding than writing code by yourself on a computer – which is a lesson Dr. Hauser has instilled in us the entire semester. Coding involves constructing strong interpersonal relationships and communication skills, so in order to become a fixture in this field the community you build is vital to your “success.” If it was not for this class, I definitely do not think I would not have thought to attend an event similar in nature to “An Evening of Python Coding.” Overall, everything went very well, and I am glad that I went. 
