#Coding Meetup Experience

##How did it go?
I am currently attending a virtual coding online meeting in China. It is a weekly meeting which focuses on data structures and algorithms. Since I am currently looking for job opportunities as a backend developer, the knowledge of data structures and algorithms are necessary for me. The speaker is Chengyun Zuo, who is a very skilled programmer in China. More than 300 programmers have attended this online meeting.


##What did you learn?
The topic of this meeting was about the quick sort algorithm. The speaker firstly gave the introduction of different kinds of sorting algorithms. Thus he introduced the theory of the quick sort algorithm. Afterwards, he gave some examples from leetcode.com, a very popular code practicing website, to help us learn more about this algorithm.


##Value
In my previous online assessments and virtual interviews, the problem involving sorting algorithms had occupied a large part of all the problem sets. Sometimes the problem is rather easy, but sometimes it may be much more complicated and take me a long time to go through. This meeting really helped me to consolidate what I already know and also helped me to have a better understanding of this algorithm. 

##How was the experience different from my expectations
It is very interesting to attend a meeting like this one. Algorithm lessons I attended before were always boring and hard to understand. But this course was rather interesting and understandable. The example used by the speaker to illustrate the theory is vivid and explainable. It will give me a deep impression on how to use this for real world problems. 


##Could you see yourself becoming a member of a professional community like this in the future?
Since my career goal is to become a backend developer, I may definitely work closely with these communities, which can provide me solutions to some real world problems. But I’m not sure whether I can be a speaker as well as him. His understanding of these algorithms is so deep that I do think it may take much more time for me to get to a stage like him. 
