---
layout: post
author: elliott
categories:
  - exercise
inclass: true
title: "Initial Github Cleanup & Merge-fest"
canvas: false
---

During the last class session I'll ask everyone to provide links to their work on Github. This in-class exercise is intended to help everyone take a look at past work that might need to be cleaned up or merged.

* With your final project partner, look at each other's open pull requests. 
  * Merge your partner's pull requests if they need to be merged. 
  * Request changes if it looks like they still have issues.
* Go to the [people page](https://inf380p.github.io/people.html) and find your partner's entry. You should see:

1. First post (either including Reflection On The Class So Far, or a separate post with this first reflection)
2. First focused reflection
3. Clicky Turtlehack
4. CSV files 

If you don't see a post, it could be because:

* their name in the `_config.yaml` file doesn't match their author name
* their post isn't in the `_posts` folder
* their post isn't a `.md` file
* their post's filename doesn't have a `YYYY-MM-DD-` at the beginning

Or a few other, related reasons. If you can, figure out which one might be the case.

* Quickly click each post to see whether you can access it. If you end up on somone *else's* post, they likely didn't include their github username in the file, which means their post URL is the same as that other person's.
* If their name isn't correctly displayed on the post, it could be because they didn't Make A Name for Themselves, or the author name might not match up.

If you find any issues, **Open a single Github Issue** listing what you've found. This does not need to be comprehensive, especially if there are a lot of issues. Use `#` to reference Pull Requests if applicable. 

Here is [an example issue](https://github.com/inf380p/inf380p.github.io/issues/242).

This will help you and your partner work towards cleaning up your Github history.